Add desktop wpf article for templates (#15547)
dotnet/docs: docs/desktop-wpf/fundamentals/styles-templates-create-apply-template.md

> ---

Author: I'm going to follow up with another PR and redo these file names and folder paths.

> ---

Reviewer: Technically you would need to add redirects then since this link will have gone live.

> ---

Author: Yes. I wanted to move everything out of here at once. But doing so will make this PR too convoluted. I'm going to move this article now and then the follow up PR will be all the others.

title: Create a template in WPF - .NET Desktop
description: Learn how to create and reference a control template in Windows Presentation Foundation and .NET Core.
author: thraka
ms.author: adegeo
ms.date: 10/20/2019
dev_langs: ["csharp", "vb"]
helpviewer_keywords: 
  - "control contract [WPF]"
  - "controls [WPF], visual structure changes"
  - "ControlTemplate [WPF], customizing for existing controls"
  - "skinning controls [WPF]"
  - "controls [WPF], appearance specified by state"
  - "templates [WPF], custom for existing controls"
ms.assetid: 678dd116-43a2-4b8c-82b5-6b826f126e31
---

# Create a template for a control

> With Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF), you can customize an existing control's visual structure and behavior with your own reusable template. Templates can be applied globally to your application, windows and pages, or directly to controls. Most scenarios that require you to create a new control can be covered by instead creating a new template for an existing control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF), you can customize an existing control's visual structure and behavior with your own reusable template. Templates can be applied globally to your application, windows, and pages, or directly to controls. Most scenarios that seemingly require creating a new control can be covered by instead creating a new template for an existing control.
```

Author: Would it be more appropriate to keep these as a single "thing" in the list of things? In the context of objects, **App** vs **Windows/Pages** vs **Controls** not **App** vs **Windows** vs **Pages** vs **Controls**

Reviewer: I read it as apply:

globally - to app, windows, and pages
directly - to controls

Which is apparently now how I was supposed to read it. So how about:

...globally to your application, controls, or windows and pages.

[!INCLUDE [desktop guide under construction](../../../includes/desktop-guide-preview-note.md)]

In this article, you'll explore creating a new <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate> for the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Button> control.

## When to create a ControlTemplate

> Controls have many properties, such as <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Border.Background%2A>, <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.Foreground%2A>, and <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.FontFamily%2A>. These properties control different aspects of the control's appearance, but the changes that you can make by setting these properties are limited. For example, you can set the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.Foreground%2A> property to blue and <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.FontStyle%2A> to italic on a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.CheckBox>. You create a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate> when you want to customize the control's appearance beyond what setting the other properties on the control will do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Controls have many properties, such as <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Border.Background%2A>, <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.Foreground%2A>, and <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.FontFamily%2A>. These properties control different aspects of the control's appearance, but the changes that you can make by setting these properties are limited. For example, you can set the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.Foreground%2A> property to blue and <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.FontStyle%2A> to italic on a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.CheckBox>. When you want to customize the control's appearance beyond what setting the other properties on the control can do, you create a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate>.
```

> In most user interfaces, a button has the same general appearance: a rectangle with some text. If you wanted to create a rounded button, you normally have to create a new control that inherits from the button or recreates the functionality of the button. Your new user control would then provide that circular visual.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most user interfaces, a button has the same general appearance: a rectangle with some text. If you wanted to create a rounded button, you could create a new control that inherits from the button or recreates the functionality of the button. In addition, the new user control would provide the circular visual.
```

> You can avoid creating new controls by customizing the visual layout of an existing control. With a rounded button, you create a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate> with the wanted visual layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can avoid creating new controls by customizing the visual layout of an existing control. With a rounded button, you create a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate> with the desired visual layout.
```

On the other hand, if you need a control with new functionality, different properties, and new settings, you would create a new <xref:System.Windows.Controls.UserControl>.

## Prerequisites

> Create a new WPF application and in *MainWindow.xaml* (or another window of your choice) set the following properties on the `<Window>` element:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new WPF application and, in *MainWindow.xaml* (or another window of your choice), set the following properties on the **Window** element:
```

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| **Title**         | `Template Intro Sample` |
| **SizetoContent** | `WidthAndHeight` |
| **MinWidth**      | `250` |

> Set the content of the `<Window>` element to the following XAML:

Reviewer: I won't correct every occurrence, but style guide says to format XML elements as bold with no angle brackets.

If you run the application, it looks like the following:

![WPF window with two unstyled buttons](media/create-apply-template/unstyled-button.png)

## Create a ControlTemplate

The most common way to declare a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate> is as a resource in the `Resources` section in a XAML file. Because templates are resources, they obey the same scoping rules that apply to all resources. Put simply, where you declare a template affects where the template can be applied. For example, if you declare the template in the root element of your application definition XAML file, the template can be used anywhere in your application. If you define the template in a window, only the controls in that window can use the template.

To start with, add a `Window.Resources` element to your *MainWindow.xaml* file:

[!code-xaml[WindowResStart](~/samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/styles-templates-create-apply-template/csharp/Window2.xaml#WindowResStart)]

Create a new `<ControlTemplate>` with the following properties set:

|     |     |
| --- | --- |

> | **x:Key**         | `roundbutton` |

Reviewer: Why not pivot the table to have Key and TargetType as column headers, so they'll be automatically bolded?

Author: I just think of it as a list, like the table above this one with 3 properties. If you have a big set of property changes, then you can't pivot otherwise you have a long horizontal line of settings.

| **TargetType**    | `Button` |

> This control template will be simple. A root element for the control, a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Grid>. An <xref:System.Windows.Shapes.Ellipse> to draw the rounded appearance of the button. And a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentPresenter> to display the user-specified button content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This control template will be simple:
- a root element for the control, a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Grid>
- an <xref:System.Windows.Shapes.Ellipse> to draw the rounded appearance of the button
- a <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentPresenter> to display the user-specified button content
```

[!code-xaml[ControlTemplate](~/samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/styles-templates-create-apply-template/csharp/Window3.xaml#ControlTemplate)]

### TemplateBinding

When you create a new <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate>, you still might want to use the public properties to change the control's appearance. The [TemplateBinding](../../framework/wpf/advanced/templatebinding-markup-extension.md) markup extension binds a property of an element that is in the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate> to a public property that is defined by the control. When you use a [TemplateBinding](../../framework/wpf/advanced/templatebinding-markup-extension.md), you enable properties on the control to act as parameters to the template. That is, when a property on a control is set, that value is passed on to the element that has the [TemplateBinding](../../framework/wpf/advanced/templatebinding-markup-extension.md) on it.

### Ellipse

> Notice that the `Fill` and `Stroke` properties of the `<Ellipse>` element are bound to the controls <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.Foreground> and <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.Background> properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the `Fill` and `Stroke` properties of the `<Ellipse>` element are bound to the control's <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.Foreground> and <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Control.Background> properties.
```

### ContentPresenter

> A [\<ContentPresenter>](xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentPresenter) element is also added to the template. Because this template is designed for a button, we have to take into consideration that the button inherits from <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl>. The button presents the content of the element. You can set anything inside of the button, such as plain text or even another control. Both of the following are valid buttons:

Reviewer: Style guide also says that link text should not have any special formatting.

> A [\<ContentPresenter>](xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentPresenter) element is also added to the template. Because this template is designed for a button, we have to take into consideration that the button inherits from <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl>. The button presents the content of the element. You can set anything inside of the button, such as plain text or even another control. Both of the following are valid buttons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [\<ContentPresenter>](xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentPresenter) element is also added to the template. Because this template is designed for a button, we have to take into consideration that the button inherits from <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl>. The button presents the content of the element. You can set anything inside of the button, such as plain text or even another control. Both of the following are valid buttons:
```
```suggestion
A [\<ContentPresenter>](xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentPresenter) element is also added to the template. Because this template is designed for a button, take into consideration that the button inherits from <xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl>. The button presents the content of the element. You can set anything inside of the button, such as plain text or even another control. Both of the following are valid buttons:
```

```xaml
<Button>My Text</Button>

<!-- and -->

<Button>
    <CheckBox>Checkbox in a button</CheckBox>
</Button>
```

> In both of the examples above, the text and the checkbox are set as to the [Button.Content](xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl.Content) property. Whatever is set as the content can be presented through a `<ContentPresenter>`, which is what the template does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In both of the previous examples, the text and the checkbox are set as the [Button.Content](xref:System.Windows.Controls.ContentControl.Content) property. Whatever is set as the content can be presented through a `<ContentPresenter>`, which is what the template does.
```

[!code-xaml[StyledButtonSize](~/samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/styles-templates-create-apply-template/csharp/Window3.xaml#StyledButtonSize)]

![WPF window with one template circular button](media/create-apply-template/styled-uniform-button.png)

## Add a Trigger

Even though a button with a template applied looks different, it behaves the same as any other button. If you press the button, the <xref:System.Windows.Controls.Primitives.ButtonBase.Click> event fires. However, you may have noticed that when you move your mouse over the button, the button's visuals don't change. These visual interactions are all defined by the template.

With the dynamic event and property systems that WPF provides, you can watch a specific property for a value and then restyle the template when appropriate. In this example, you'll watch the button's <xref:System.Windows.UIElement.IsMouseOver> property. When the mouse is over the control, style the `<Ellipse>` with a new color. This type of trigger is known as a **PropertyTrigger**.

> For this to work though, you'll need to add a name to the `<Ellipse>` that you can reference. Give it the name of `backgroundElement`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this to work, you'll need to add a name to the `<Ellipse>` that you can reference. Give it the name of **backgroundElement**.
```

Style guide says to format user input as bold.

[!code-xaml[EllipseName](~/samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/styles-templates-create-apply-template/csharp/Window4.xaml#EllipseName)]

> Next, add a new <xref:System.Windows.Trigger> to the [ControlTemplate.Triggers](xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate.Triggers) collection. The trigger will watch the `IsMouseOver` for the value `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, add a new <xref:System.Windows.Trigger> to the [ControlTemplate.Triggers](xref:System.Windows.Controls.ControlTemplate.Triggers) collection. The trigger will watch the `IsMouseOver` event for the value `true`.
```

[!code-xaml[ControlTemplate](~/samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/styles-templates-create-apply-template/csharp/Window4.xaml?name=ControlTemplate&highlight=6-9)]

Next, add a `<Setter>` to the `<Trigger>` that changes the `Fill` property of the `<Ellipse>` to a new color.

> [!code-xaml[MouseOver](~/samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/styles-templates-create-apply-template/csharp/Window5.xaml#MouseOver)]

Reviewer: This sample shows up as empty in the preview.

Author: I'm trying to track down why 3 examples show up empty. There are no errors and the references look correct.

To convert the **PropertyTrigger** to an animated visual state, First, remove the `<ControlTemplate.Triggers>` element from your template.

[!code-xaml[CleanTemplate](~/samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/styles-templates-create-apply-template/csharp/Window5.xaml#CleanTemplate)]

Next, in the `<Grid>` root of the control template, add the `<VisualStateManager.VisualStateGroups>` element with a `<VisualStateGroup>` for `CommonStates`. Define two states, `Normal` and `MouseOver`.

[!code-xaml[VisualState](~/samples/snippets/desktop-guide/wpf/styles-templates-create-apply-template/csharp/Window6.xaml#VisualState)]

> Any animations defined in a `<VisualState>` will be applied when that state is triggered. Create animations for each state. Animations are put inside of a `<Storyboard>` element. For more information about storyboards, see [Storyboards Overview](../../framework/wpf/graphics-multimedia/storyboards-overview.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any animations defined in a `<VisualState>` are applied when that state is triggered. Create animations for each state. Animations are put inside of a `<Storyboard>` element. For more information about storyboards, see [Storyboards Overview](../../framework/wpf/graphics-multimedia/storyboards-overview.md).
```
